The Joe Rogan experience.
Now, when you work as a coach for George,
you weren't just working as a jujitsu coach.
You were working in almost like a mastermind,
sort of a position. You, I mean,
I saw some conversations that you had with him,
where you discussed various things. And in fact,
one of the things you came to me about was you asked me if I knew
anyone who was proficient at the spinning back kick.
And that's how I got to working with George. Your P your,
your coaching with him was not just simply like the,
these are the principles of jujitsu. This is what I want you to work on.
When the fight goes to the ground,
you were working on a lot of different aspects.
Like you are a guy that sort of put it together. Now,
when you don't have a background in striking and you know, you are,
you're looking at all of these various disciplines and trying to formulate a
strategy for a guy who was just such a Supreme athlete like George,
how did you, how did you formulate that?
Did you do it based on the individual and based on their physical strengths and
limitations and sort of formulate what you think would be the best approach?
Did you work it out with him in conjunction?
Um, the, when, when George comes to train with me, there's,
there's a bunch of considerations festival George lives in Montreal.
I live in New York. So time is always an issue. Well,
he does go down there quite often, but, um, uh, but it's not like a squat squad,
like seven days a week, three times a day, George was never like that. Um, uh,
so in the time available, we'll work on, uh, on,
on what we can. So everything's always done with Jorgen. Okay.
How much time is available and what is a scenario that's coming up for George?
Almost always. It was, um, uh, an upcoming mixed martial arts fight. Okay.
Um, so a lot of people often ask me to say, you know, how come you didn't teach,
teach Joyce and PLA clogs? Why, why wasn't he late logging everyone in MMA?
Um, well, that's, that's a good question. Uh, first off, um,
late logging, as you saw from the Gordon,
Ryan clip requires if it's not done well,
lake logging is one of those things where if it's done well, it's amazing,
but if it's done badly, it's the worst looking thing in the world.
It's a disaster. Um, so, uh, secondly,
George's game because it's taped down to so strong is almost always done from
top position on the ground is rare for George to be in bottom position on the
ground. Um, and in a fight situation,
if you're already on top of someone and you've got the striking prowess of
George St. PM, I was happy to,
to coach him more in what we call a grapple boxing, this the skill of,
of grappling to punching on the ground. It just made more sense for him. Um,
he's competent in leg blogging,
but he's not like Gary Tonin Eddie Cummings or Gordon Ryan,
could he finish most black bouncy? Absolutely.
But why you stake a fight where literally millions of dollars. I mean,
40 is a legacy on the line.
Why would you take that risk when you could just stay on down to punch him out?
Like he did with say John fetch, for example, you know? Um,
so it didn't really make sense to push that hard on George. Um,
your question though was okay. Well, what about these other skills?
What about standing position? Well, um, I'm, I'm fascinated,
not just by just my martial arts in general,
and I've always believed all the various sport martial arts in the world have
areas where they are particularly strong. For example, I've always,
people make fun of TaeKwonDo, you know, that are,
they don't want us talking on him. I mean, you'll back me up on this joke.
There were some TaeKwonDo players out there at Olympic level who can kick with a
skill level that most people can't even imagine. Um,
uh,
I've seen people like her Perez kicking demonstrations with it.
You're looking at it.
This is one of the most impressive things I've ever seen in my life.
And this is the guy who, if he hits you is going to take your head off it's. I.
Was there, it wouldn't hurt. Pres was in his prime. I watched him Kao,
quite a few people. I watched him Kao, uh,
one of the U S national champions with an ax care. So.
With the worst chaos I've ever seen in my life came from TaeKwonDo.
Like they tend to involve a jump spinning kicks with just huge amounts of,
of, of kinetic energy being developed.
You see the same thing in point fighting karate season, terrible knockout,
some point finding people make fun of these sports acting on their own is the
issue. That's the issue. That's the issue on their own. They got problems.
But if you can integrate that into a well-developed complete skillset,
they could be incredibly effective.
And I always saw tremendous potential for TaeKwonDo dos jump spinning backache.
No one does spinning backaches better than TaeKwonDo.
That's one of their main things and they do it incredibly well.
The setups are fantastic that the application,
the mechanics everything's super impressive.
So I always thought that would be a, you know,
George had a good spinning back kick,
but I thought that would be a nice addition.
You always want to be building new skills into a upon you don't,
you don't want to be that predictable guy where everyone knows what you're
doing. And, um, uh, and I know you came from TaeKwonDo backgrounds and, uh,
so I thought that would be an interesting thing for you to work on with him.
Well, it was.
A funny conversation because that was my specialty. Yes.
And so when you brought in, I always wanted to talk to you.
I was fo found you a fascinating guy. So when he came up to me and you said,
do you know anyone? It's almost like a trick question. It was a trick question.
And when you know anyone besides Joe, like what I said, I was like,
I was hesitant. I was like, okay, you're not going to believe this, but.
The truth is I knew you had a good junk swinging back. I was trying to subtly,
did you know, how did you know we would get, oh, okay.
I thought you were just with me. I mean,
but I felt like when I was telling you, I was like, man, I don't even want it.
I wish I knew someone who did it as well.
As me. You should have just been like, yeah,
I got the best jump spinning back in the. Not really. I.
Did jump spinning back, hit quite a bit,
but I prefer a regular spinning back here. I want my foot, the ground.
Cause I push off that foot. Yeah.
There's a significant amount of force in the left leg forcing, uh,
pushing off that back. Interestingly.
You've seen some,
some guys out there now having good success and even me spinning back because I
remember seeing Michael Page had a beautiful one. He's got average.
Yeah. That guy can do very impressive.
He's another guy who came from that point fighting background, you know,
you see Raymond Daniels and him and a lot of these guys from that
background, Raymond Daniels.
Worked with, uh, George, uh, for his last two fights. Very, very impressive guy.
Phenomenal.
Yeah. And, and again,
it's he had just the point fighting skills and now he's developing real
boxing skills and he's, you know, you've seen him in Beltour Kickbox, you know,
he's you see, you see the integration of the two it's phenomenal. I mean,
he could just do things physically that most Kickbox just really don't know what
he's doing. You know, he'll, he'll jump up and do,
what's called like a touch spinning back kick.
Like he'll jump up and touch you with the front.
Leg. I saw that he hit it in a glorified, I believe. And, um,
yeah.
He's phenomenal. He's phenomenal. But then again,
when you see that it's like those things by themselves,
you're just going to get taken to the ground and smashed. And most people,
unless you land one of those catastrophic spinning backaches right away,
the odds are you, you,
you need all those other things as well in order to be particularly effective,
which is why George was such a way with it. Yeah, yeah,
yeah. But that was, uh, that was a fun moment. It was an interesting,
because like I've always wanted to like show somebody this it's cause it's a
weird little thing that I know how to do.
Um, going back to your original question,
the idea of Georgian and shoot chatbots,
you'll see that Georgia's entire methodology in the standing position is built
around the concept of a dilemma.
The dilemma is always between his jab and his takedown.
People always talk about proactive and reactive. Takedowns okay.
This guy's a reactive take. This guy's a proactive takedown guy.
The thing about George is he would use his jab
proactively, but he would use his takedowns reactively.
Now that's interesting because George would literally provoke people.
You're saying the sit down, I would.
Just want to point this out past tense. You're saying this like, you know,
something, I don't know. No, no, no. George just won the middleweight title,
relinquished the title.
And then the great speculation is will George fight again?
The truth is that no one knows because it comes down to medical problems.
George has a, uh, uh,
he's got a problem on his stomach and colitis. Is that what it is? Yeah.
And what is that exactly? It's uh, I'm not gonna claim to a medical expert,
but it's one of the most frustrating things that George has had to deal with
where there are certain parts of the human body that is out of your control and
the stomach is one of them, just things happening in your stomach.
You can't control it. Things like stress seem to make it worse. Um, and,
uh, uh, the truth is that no one really knows at this point. So, um,
wherever there's doubt, my instinct is to think, well,
you already want to come back, George,
you've done all this and what a great way to cap off the career too.
It was amazing.
And I got to tell you when he came back,
this is what was really interesting about that fight. George had said,
I'm better. I am a better martial artist than I was before.
And he looked better. I mean,
he definitely looked like he was a little out of competition.
Like there was a moment. Yeah.
Okay. How many fighters do you know, came back after a four year layoff?
Very few, but skill wise, he looked phenomenal. I mean,
his striking looked incredibly smooth and I think you could see it in
Bisping's face. Like pretty early on, like this guy is,
this is not a rusty George St. Pierre. It's not a small welterweight. Who's,
you know, making his way in the middle where he looked huge,
he looked phenomenal. His, his technique,
the way he was landing leg kicks and his sharp jab.
And then ultimately that left hand that he used to stun Bisping and get him on
the ground. I mean, he looks sensational.
Yes. Um, uh, you were there the night.
George went into his first retirement and you'll recall the whole retirement
thing was kind of, the speech was vague. It wasn't, yeah, it was confusing.
And um, cause he intrude, he didn't know if he wanted to retire. Um,
the whole thing was actually contrived in the octagon right there in front of
you. I would have been a hard fight. Uh,
the training camp hadn't been the best camp though. The fight for Hendricks was,
uh, George was unclear if he wanted to fight at all,
there were all kinds of controversies involved in the fight. And um,
then when the fight was over, it was, it was a very close fight. Um, and, uh,
uh, he wasn't sure what he wanted to do.
There was a language miscommunication and ultimately he, he essentially,
he walked away from the game and he walked away for four years.
That's a long time to be out of a sport that as young as him, a man,
which is evolving all the time, every year, the sport changes and, uh,
the belts tend to change hands very, very quickly. Um,
so when George started talking to me about the idea of, okay,
I want to come back, I think I've still got comeback. I want to come back.
There's a desire. Passion. My point to him was first off.
You sure you really want to do this? Like, you know,
the last two fight camps was tough.
You didn't seem to have the same kind of drive as he used to have you sure you
want to do this? Is this like a middle-aged fantasy here going through here?
And he said, none of that, I feel this. I want to come back.
So my question to him was if you're gonna come back,
are you just going to do the same thing?
You're just going to come back to welterweight and do what you always did,
which is come out and beat the best welterweights and just hold a title.
It's going to be doing the same thing. I thought, if you're going to come back,
let's do something significant, something you haven't done before.
And so the way I put it to him was what are the three most persistent
criticisms you always hear about George St. Pierre, number one,
he never fought up a weight class and never went up. Number two,
you fought. So tactically sound was such an emphasis on,
uh, strategy and techniques or what have you that matches could become
dull. The average fan was like, well, yeah, he's,
he's winning easily and it's dominant, but it doesn't do it for,
it's not excited, no drama and the funds on gun. Um,
so you had this idea that, uh, on one hand, uh, uh,
he was very technically sound strategically deep,
but the fights weren't as exciting as they ought to be. Um,
the idea that he'd never gone up a weight category in the third,
most persistent Chris and Lee didn't finish fights. Okay.
He was a very skilled fighter. It wasn't finishing fights.
So my point here was okay. If you got to come back,
let's do it in a way where you address those three things. Okay.
George's is always concerned about his legacy as a fighter.
And if there were three persistent criticisms of George NPS legacy,
so three things you don't finish in fights,
you never went up a weight class and you're too tactical. Okay?
You're not providing the drama that a fight should. So I said,
let's change things
we've got in that four years. Previous to that, whenever I was training George,
I was training him for a fight. He was going to fight. He's fighting.
Nick Diaz is funny. Carla's condos finding, you know, whoever.
And it was always getting him ready for a fight.
You find him Matt Hughes in two months, let's get ready. Now you're a tired.
I'm not going to train you to fight some dude.
I'm going to train you in jujitsu.
Freddie Roach is going to train you in boxing.
In this scenes,
we could S we hit the time now to start working on finishing skills.
A significant change occurred where my primary emphasis in training George in
that four year layoff was in submissions. Now,
happily that happened at what time, the time the squad was coming out.
So I had a group of some of the best submission peoples in the world for George
to work with. So his submission started getting better. Suddenly Joe St. Pierre,
he got on your back as a problem. He submitting people in the gym.
I could run off some names. I won't do it cause it's not the thing to do,
but I could find out some names of people he submitted in the gym that would
shock you, like well known you to two people. And for the first time,
he's our primary focus. Wasn't on grapple walks and it was submission.
Freddie Roach was working on with, on the mechanics of punching.
George always had good in-out movement. It was had like that karate movement,
the, um, the ability. He always had a strong jab,
but now he's teaching them how to sit on a punch.
Suddenly George had a left hook. Okay.
And you're a guy who can integrate lift,
uh left-hand between jab and leave took. That's a dangerous man. Okay. Um,
everyone was worried, you know,
there's so much overreaction to George's J at this suddenly left hook
opportunities were opening up and now he was sitting on that left or can people
getting hurt.
So now for the first time you got a guy who's got submissions and he's hitting
with genuine power.
As he came back, there was a question of who's going to be the opponent.
And the next thing I say is, well, you knew it went up a weight division,
go up to 85.
Now was any consideration about going up to 85 because of the fact that Bisping
was the champion.
No, George has trained with bispecific. The decision.
Was made before Bisman was the champion. Really? Yeah.
How far in advance was the decision made?
Because Bisping a defendant against Henderson one against four.
Year project. Okay.
So during initially, initially.
I couldn't make that decision because another student of mine,
Chris Weidman was a 180 5 pound champion and Chris and Jordan never fight each
other. But once that was no longer an issue, then it was like, Hey, this,
this could work. This could be.
So D during the entire four years, he was talking about eventually coming.
Tired four years now. Okay.
But he was training the whole time and I was pushing him.
I kid you not fighting anymore. Let's do some submission grappling. Right. Okay.
Um, he stuck with Freddie Roach. He, he loves working with Freddie Roach. And,
um, uh, so the training was, was going in.
Different directions. It was this more time coach.
Um, mostly he works for us a hobby and try now, but that's more, uh,
integrated for us as a black bottle mine. So he, um, often, uh,
does jujitsu was for us where I teach for us and frost that does a good job
there. Um, but for us, uh, ties things together. That's his principle.
And I know he trained with Phil nurse for a while as well. Yeah. Um,
then he trained with a lot of guys who came out of, uh, uh,
Thailand itself from Tiga, Moya, Thai. Um, uh, yod,
that's a shortening of his actual name. They all have very long names, but, uh,
yod was one of his trainers. They trained him prior to conduit and Diaz,
um, uh, did a fine job.
So there's never been a shortage of coaches in his life, but, uh,
there are certain things that seem to gel with them more than others.
Interestingly, during that four year period,
George had a strong rebirth into karate and worked with a lot of
specialized karate people, including Raymond Daniels and others. Uh,
they came from the, mostly from the European point, fighting karate, uh,
circuit. And he was working with them a lot and so somewhere,
or they crossed a certain poor period time where you're dealing with
a different athlete.
Now this is a guy who's had four years off and the training had gone in
different directions.
It's finishing skills in both fisticuffs and grant Blaine had gotten
considerably better. Um, he was, uh,
toying with the idea of going up to 85 and experimenting with diet, et cetera,
to get his body weight up. It's never an easy thing to do.
And tactically,
it was working more on the idea of being an exciting fighter through movement
and pushing harder for the finish. And, uh,
and I thought those were three very, very healthy directions to go. And,
and, um, uh, this would, is it worth if he did come back,
this would be offer a genuine opportunity to address the three most persistent
criticism of his career. Initially, there was a lot of resistance from the UFC.
I don't think they were fond of the idea at all.
They wanted him to go to one 70 and, and do what he had done. And, uh,
but George pushed hard for the, uh, for the fighter 85.
And ultimately it happened in a rather strange way. Tyrone Woodley had, uh,
a fight at one 70, which, um, uh,
wasn't the most crowd-pleasing fight. And, uh, uh,
George St. Pierre was supposed to fight Tyrone Woodley and then USA,
you know what, five Brisbane it's on. So they,
we chose the Madison square garden.
That's one of the great fight capitals of the world. And, uh,
that's how it happened. So was.
Consideration and fighting one 70. Yes. And so this was the UFC's idea,
but what about your plan? Yeah.
For, I, I, I thought, first of all, I'm, I'm not the matchmaker.
I'm not the main policymaker. I'm the, I don't want to say that I was the guy.
I was the guy that suggested those ideas.
And George seems to like the idea that you said, if I'm going to come back,
if I'm going to take the risk about four year layoff and come back,
it's a big risk. Yeah. I mean,
Mohammad Ali came back after three years and had two warm-up fights and still
lost his title. It's fine. Yeah.
But Muhammad Ali really wasn't working out. That was,
that was when the Vietnam war thing had happened.
But he was mostly doing tours of college campuses and it, yeah,
it wasn't really working out the whole time and improving. You.
Could see the difference in Mohammad Ali's body when he came back, but still.
There's many other examples, like sugar Ray Leonard came back off to layoffs.
He had one successful and one very unsuccessful come back and he was working
hard the whole time. So coming back, it's a hard, it's a tricky,
tricky thing on many levels too, not just physical, but also cycle. Yeah. So.
Now this colitis thing is thrown a monkey wrench into the gears.
Actually it threw a monkey wrench during the camp. Really? Yeah.
I could tell you some stories about that. That camp was, uh, as,
as good as the four years was the camp itself. I can say now,
because it's over was a disaster.
This is probably the worst camp I've ever been involved in. Um,
I was coaching of course, the squad for ADCC. So, uh, ADCC,
I believe was, uh, around six weeks, uh, before George's fight.
So was in Finland and communicating with George and he's like feeling good.
Let's get the moment I get back. Obviously,
we're going on a plane from Finland to Montreal and start the camp,
uh, is at Mount, uh, I've got stomach issues. And, um, I was like,
what do you mean stomach issues? What does that even mean now? Um,
uh, about two weeks into the camp,
the issues got so bad that George literally could not.
Now this is a six week fight camp. It's a very short camp back in the day.
We used to do eight to 12 weeks,
but George thought a shorter camp would be better as a getting older.
He wanted a shorter camp. First two weeks were okayed, but I was in,
uh, the aftermath of the Finland expedition. And, um, uh,
when I first went up, George said, I gotta cancel. Okay. I,
I can't train. I'm like fine. It's four weeks away.
And Georgia two weeks off,
it was a critical moment on a Friday evening where I said to Foracia hobby.
This is the second time I've had to say this to, for us.
I'll be the other was the college conduct camp. I said, George,
isn't training by Monday, we're going to pull the plug. There's no other way.
And we were talking about a four year layoff and this camp is lost.
It's dead in the water. So four weeks out, he takes two weeks off. Uh,
I believe it might've been five I'll check the dates later, but very close.
It was, it was a critical two week period. Where during that two weeks,
what is he able to do? Essentially? Nothing. Nothing. Yeah, just no train,
light drilling some movement. And, uh, he, he was, it,
it occurred at the worst possible time.
It wasn't at the start of the campus in the middle of the camp so that the first
two weeks were lost because then, uh,
we had two weeks of inactivity, then there's two weeks left.
And I remember the first time I went up, I bought Jake shields,
Gary toner and Gordon Ryan with me.
We came up and we went through some drills on the ground and I was happy.
You know, Joseph's okay on the ground. He did fine against the squad guys. And,
um, uh, we worked on some specialized grappling stuff.
And then the next day he went to do a shoot box workout.
Now I could sit here all day until you adventures
of George St. Pierre doing shoe box training with people.
I've seen him spot everybody again, I'm not gonna mention names,
but I've seen George St. Pierre take down. If it loosely
some of the biggest names in mixed martial arts in weight divisions,
far away of his own. So many times per round,
you just lose count. I got, I, I I'm,
I'm afraid to even tell you the stories cause people wouldn't believe me. Um,
I'm used to seeing George St. Pierre shoot boxing bap bang down. Right? Okay.
Um, I've seen that since the side of his career, I watched your St.
Pier do a shoe-box workout where he couldn't score a take down.
This is a fights two weeks away. I'm just looking, going like, holy heck,
what is this? He's getting hit. He's getting frustrated. He's getting tired.
And I said to, for us, you know, this is, this is a crisis.
This is one of the biggest UFC's of the year it's Madison square garden.
He's the headline.
The UFC had to pull some big things to get this fight to happen.
They didn't originally didn't want it. If we pull out, now,
it's going to look like a disaster. It's going to wait. George,
let the UFC down. Um,
and to his everlasting credit, George said,
I'll be back on Monday and I'll be better. We went up and,
uh, he, he is, he dug in deep. What can I tell you? He's a trooper.
He, um, he trained every day, those last two weeks. And
as each day went by, there was significant improvement.
And I remember there was a distinct moment.
About five days before the end of the camp, I saw him do a shoe box workout.
And he looked like the old George and I was okay. I believe in this kit again,
you can do it. Jamie.
Will you please Google colitis? I don't know enough.
I believe you should. Google ulcerative.
Colitis.
Yeah. I don't know. It's so it's something to do with stomach ulcers.
Um, I'm not going to claim to be an expert, but, uh, yeah,
I can tell you what the symptoms were,
was extreme stomach pain and inability to eat. It screwed up his entire diet.
And when did it start? Uh,
it started early in the camp and got progressively worse. And then for the camp,
there was no issues. Uh, here.
Ulcerative colitis is usually only, uh,
in innermost lining of the large intestine,
colon and rectum forms range from mild to severe having ulcerative colitis puts
a patient at increased risk of developing colon cancer symptoms,
including rectal bleeding, bloody diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and pain.
It sounds like, yeah.
If you read the, can you bring it back? Yep. Read the first four. Yeah.
Treatment can help, but this condition cannot be cured.
Requires a medical diagnosis, lab tests, or imaging always required.
Chronic can last for years or be lifelong.
It's incredibly frustrating for them to deal with. And it says treatments.
Include medications and surgery.
Yeah. So it's a three, but,
uh,
it appeared to back off a little bit in the last two weeks he came back and he,
um, this is the kind of person George St.
Pierre is the morning of the fight. Saturday morning.
We're in New York city in the hotel room, uh, for us hobbies,
Freddie Roach and myself are at the breakfast table.
George comes down for breakfast and he's weighed in.
He looks at his breakfast is originally the
plan because it was a fight at 180 5 was to have George come in at a,
at a higher body weight.
But he ended up weighing 191 pounds,
which is exactly the same as he used to fight at welterweight the same body
weight. So that was kind of a disappointment, you know? Um,
and, uh, he quietly excused himself and went to the bathroom.
Everyone else went away to do their things.
And I sat there and I realized he's in the bathroom for an hour.
He came out, I was like, George, you okay. And he looked at me, he said,
I'm fine. But I knew he wasn't. And then he went out for it.
Um,
and then afterwards he told me I was in so much pain and he was afraid to tell
me because he would worry that if I cornered him and I thought he was
compromised,
I wouldn't corner him the way I normally would that I would doubt him.
So he kept it all inside. Didn't say a word. And, uh, he's a good kid. You know,
he got help at a market like that. Wow. Well.
That's what makes him a champion. Yeah. It's one of the things it's,
it's less than perfect conditions. He could still rise to the occasion.
Less than perfect. It was a very far from perfect. Now.
You said that during the Johnny Hendricks fight, uh,
during the camp for that fight, when, uh,
he decided to impromptu retire inside the octagon. Yeah.
That there was talk during the camp that he didn't want to fight. Yeah.
What was that about?
Really centered around two things. One I can just,
I can not discuss because it involves a personal life. Joe St.
PA there was some things going on in his personal life that, um, uh,
deeply affected him.
And he was deeply unhappy with some circumstances in his personal life. And, um,
it's not appropriate for me to talk about those. Um,
and the second was the whole idea that it become an obsession with George at
that time, which was the use of anabolic steroids in mixed martial arts.
And, um,
he was deeply unhappy with what he perceived as the prevalence of the use of
anabolic steroids in mixed martial arts as a whole and among his
opponents in particular. And, um, uh,
he wanted a testing program to be bought in for that fight.
There was talk about it, but nothing came of it. And, uh,
it became like this psychological obsession during the camp and,
uh, uh, between those two issues, uh, there was a lot of unhappiness.
He, he came in, he did it strain, you know, he's, he's a professional athlete.
It's not like he missed workouts or anything crazy.
Like there wasn't a going out at night or anything foolish,
but there was a degree of unhappiness where I'm looking and
thinking, how much longer can this go on?
Now,
there was some talk about the Tyron Woodley fight and
then Tyron had this bad performance.
But if George did get healthy
and was confident enough in his health that he could get through,
get through an actual training camp,
would he be interested in considering a fight with Tyron Woodley?
Absolutely. I think Tyron Woodley is a great champion.
I know he gets a lot of stick. A lot of flag. That kid is talented,
very talented, very good.
He doesn't think George wants to fight him. He was on the podcast the other day.
Yeah. I, I think, uh,
people say that for reasons so that they can motivate someone to find them,
et cetera, et cetera. There's a political aspect to it.
I think they're both athletes have a deep respect for each other.
[Inaudible].